## Project Proposal

### Question/need:
I will create a chess engine using a neural network. I will provide a board state (a snapshot of a position within a chess game) as input and get as output the move predicted by the neural network. I will assess this model by comparing the performance of my engine against moves that are generated randomly. I am choosing this project because it will let me explore CNNs, and formatting the data so that in can be provided as inputs to the CNN will be a good exercise in learning Python and Pandas.

### Data Description:
The neural network requires the board state to be processed into numeric inputs. The chess database I have provides data in PGN form. Each alphanumeric combination represents a move on the chessboard. The initial letter represents the piece being moved (r = rook, b = bishop, etc.), and the following letter-number combination shows the destination for that piece. Chess rows are called 'ranks' and are numbered, and chess columns are called 'files' and are lettered. The move ra8 is read as the rook moving to the square A8. This notation uses special characters to show certain situations like checks and castling. Below is an example of a PGN string:

`<1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 dxe4 5. Nxe4 Nbd7 6. Bd3 h6 7. Bh4 g5 8. Bg3 Nxe4 9. Bxe4 f5 10. Qh5+ Ke7 11. h4 {White resigns} 0-1>`

FICS Games Database has millions of games in PGN format https://www.ficsgames.org/

### Process Outline

I will convert the PGN data into a series of board states. The eleven-move game in the PGN above would be converted to eleven board states where each board state shows the result of the preceding moves. I will save these board states using the [FEN string notation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forsyth%E2%80%93Edwards_Notation). FEN strings still require special characters and letters, so I will need to convert these to numbers. I will experiment with a few different methods for rendering and processing these boards:
* Store the FEN string as a numeric vector. Allow for 64 inputs to NN (1 for each piece on the board), plus some additional inputs for board metadata (e.g., whether the king has castled)
* Store the board state as a matrix and use a convolutional neural network instead of a sequential network. Treat the board more like image data to form a prediction.

The NN will use one board state as input and will provide a single move as output. I will use softmax activation for the output neurons describe every possible move. the successive board state (generated by the next move) as the test for validation. 


### Tools/other requirements
In addition to the database mentioned above, I will be using the Keras library as well as the python-chess library, which provides convenience functions to convertn PGN to FEN, keep track of board states, and test for valid moves.

~~~
